# Lecture Homework Week 04 - Tuesday

In this lecture homework, we will move away from programming in Verilog and move to programming on an **ARM microcontroller**. From here on, we will focus on this platform for the lectures. The labs will also introduce programming on an ARM **microcontroller**, specifically using the Raspberry Pi Pico.

For these homeworks, however, we will use an **emulator** called **QEMU** rather than a physical microcontroller.

We will also learn about **cross-compiling**. For most of the projects you did in other classes, the programs you wrote were compiled for the platform you were doing the coding on. This system is called the **host system**. For other applications, such as embedded systems, you are compiling for a different platform than the one you are programming on. The system you are running the embedded applications on is called the **target**. When the host and target are different platforms, you are cross-compiling. For example, in CS 120B, the target system was the Arduino Uno, which uses the ATMEL processor.

In this lecture homework, we will explore both the host and target systems.

## Getting the Code

As with the previous lecture homework, this assignment is hosted on GitHub. You will create your own repository using the assignment repository as a template. To do this:

1.  Click on **"Use this template."**
2.  Select **"Create a new repository."**
3.  Give your repository a descriptive name.
4.  Click **"Create repository."**

Once created, clone the repository to your local machine or open it in a GitHub Codespace to begin working.

## Hello, World\!

We are all familiar with the ubiquitous "Hello, World\!" program. You have probably written a similar program in at least two languages. For this assignment, we will write it in the C programming language.

The following code is "Hello, World\!" for C and should be stored in the file named `src/hello.c`:

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    printf("Hello, World!\n");
    return 0;
}
```

### Writing the Code

Using VS Code, create a file in the `src` directory with the name `hello.c`. Be sure to follow these directions exactly. The commands below assume this file organization.

### Running in a Codespace

For this **lecture** homework, you should run it in a GitHub Codespace. After you have cloned the original repository using it as a template, go to the **"Code \<\>"** button and select the **"Codespaces"** tab. Then select the **"Create codespace on main"** button. This action will eventually result in a VS Code instance running in your browser. The first time you do this, it will take about 10 minutes. We will work in this codespace for the rest of this homework.

### Cross-Compiling the Code

In this section, you will compile the "Hello, World\!" program for the host system (**x86\_64**) and for the target system (**ARM**). The big idea behind high-level programming languages is that you write the code once and can compile it for any system. We will do that here, but we need separate compilers for each of these systems. The command `gcc` will be used to compile the code for the host system. The command `arm-none-eabi-gcc` will be used to compile code for the target system.

Before we create the executable, let's explore the difference between the assembly code generated by each of these compilers. First, let's look at the assembly generated by `gcc`.

The following command will create a file called `hello_host.s` which will contain the assembly code for the host system:

```bash
gcc -S -o hello_host.s src/hello.c
```

The following command will create a file called `hello_target.s` which will contain the assembly code for the target system:

```bash
arm-linux-gnueabi-gcc -S -o hello_target.s src/hello.c
```

Open each of the `.s` files and observe the assembly generated for each system. Use these files to answer questions in the accompanying questions file that you will turn in for this assignment. (See the section on [What to Turn In](#what-to-turn-in)).

Now, let's create the executables for both systems.

The following is the command to compile the code for the host system:

```bash
gcc -o hello_host -static src/hello.c
```

The following is the command to compile the code for the target system:

```bash
arm-linux-gnueabi-gcc -o hello_target -static src/hello.c
```

## Exploring the Executables

We can learn information about the contents of both `hello_host` and `hello_target` with the `file` tool.

The following command will display information about the file `hello_host`:

```bash
file hello_host
```

The following command will display information about the file `hello_target`:

```bash
file hello_target
```

Take note of the output of each of these commands. You will put them into the file you turn in for this homework assignment.

## Running the Executables

Now, let's try to run each of these executables. Remember to save the output of each of these commands to turn in.

First, let's try to run the host executable:

```bash
./hello_host
```

Now, let's try the target **executable**:

```bash
./hello_target
```

In this second case, you should get an error. Think about why this error occurred.

Let's see if we can run the target code on the host system using an emulator. The **QEMU** tool will allow us to accomplish this task.

Run the following command to run the target executable on the host system:

```bash
qemu-arm ./hello_target
```

Does the program now run?

You can also emulate running the host executable using QEMU.

Run the following command to run the host executable in the emulator:

```bash
qemu-x86_64 ./hello_host
```

What do you **think** would happen if you ran the target executable using the command above?

**QEMU** will be used for most, and probably all, future homework assignments. It will allow us to explore embedded systems programming concepts at a low level without having to run them on an actual microcontroller.

## What to Turn In

1.  Open the file `homework_template.docx` on your local computer and answer the questions with regards to the work you did above.
2.  Export it as a **PDF**.
3.  Turn in this PDF on **Gradescope**. Please be sure to clearly mark where the answer to each question is located. This makes the grading process smoother—and happy graders mean happy grades\!
